Is Java the Best Language for Artificial Intelligence Projects? (#3641)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/java-arguably-the-king-of-programming-languages-but-is-it-the-best-language-for-artificial-intelligence-projects/index.md

- [Why develop AI in Java?](#why-develop-ai-in-java?)
- [Java compared to other artificial intelligence programming languages](#java-compared-to-other-artificial-intelligence-programming-languages)
- [What is the best programming language for machine learning projects?](#what-is-the-best-programming-language-for-machine-learning-projects)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [Further reading](#further-reading)

### How is Java used in AI?
Java provides many artificial intelligence frameworks that are beneficial to data scientists. They include [Apache Jena](https://jena.apache.org/), [d3web](https://www.d3web.de/), [Tweety](https://tweetyproject.org/), [Neuroph](http://neuroph.sourceforge.net/), [Stanford CoreNLP](https://stanfordnlp.github.io/CoreNLP/), Java Machine Learning Library ([Java-ML](http://java-ml.sourceforge.net/)), [Weka](https://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/), [Jenetics](https://jenetics.io/), and [Spring Roo](https://projects.spring.io/spring-roo/).

In the artificial intelligence landscape, Java is used in:

- Genetic programming
- Search algorithms
- Artificial neural networks
- Multi-robot systems
- Machine learning solutions

#### Genetic programming

> Genetic programming is part of [evolutionary computation](https://www.igi-global.com/dictionary/evolutionary-computing/39414), a computational intelligence methodology inspired by natural evolution. Evolutionary computing is a rapidly growing field of AI. Genetic programming is comprised of artificial intelligence metaheuristics. Metaheuristics optimization algorithms and evolutionary algorithms are a subset of artificial intelligence. They imitate nature mechanisms to solve optimization problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Genetic programming is a new method of generating computer programs derived from the model of biological [evolution](https://www.igi-global.com/dictionary/evolutionary-computing/39414). These programs are ‘bred’ through continuous improvement of an initial random population of programs. These Improvements are possible through stochastic variation of programs and selection based on prespecified criteria for judging the quality of a solution.  Evolutionary computing is a rapidly growing field of AI because  Genetic Programming systems evolve to solve pre-described automatic programming and machine learning problems. 

Genetic programming is comprised of artificial intelligence metaheuristics which is a high-level problem-independent algorithmic framework that provides a set of guidelines or strategies to develop heuristic optimization algorithms evolutionary algorithms are a subset of artificial intelligence. They imitate nature mechanisms to solve optimization problems.
```

Evolutionary techniques are applied to optimization problems, many of which are combinatorial optimization problems such as shortest paths, spanning trees, and matroid problems. Others are multi-objective optimization problems that involve two or more conflicting optimization goals.

Evolutionary techniques deal simultaneously with a set of possible solutions allowing a faster finding of the Pareto optimal in a single run of the algorithm instead of performing a series of separate runs.

#### Genetic algorithms

> Genetic algorithms start with a set of solutions referred to as a population. The set of solutions from the first population are compiled to form a new population. The ideology is that this new population will show better characteristics than the old population. Only the fittest individuals are picked for reproduction to increase the chances of reproducing better solutions (offspring).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Genetic algorithms is a stochastic global optimization algorithm inspired by the biological theory of evolution which performs an optimization procedure. It starts with a set of solutions referred to as a population. The first set of solutions from the population are compiled to form a new population by iterating over the main loop of the algorithm in repeated fixed number or until no further improvement is seen in the best solution over a given number of iterations. The ideology is that this new population will show better characteristics than the old population. In this algorithm, only the fittest individuals are picked for reproduction to increase the chances of reproducing better solutions (offspring).
```

#### Search algorithms

> Most of the applications in use today have a search feature that helps users find the relevant information quickly. Fetching data stored in data structures such as Arrays, Maps, and Lists is possible because of search algorithms written in the java language. Search operations determine the responsiveness of apps to the end-users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the applications in use today have a search feature to help users find  relevant information quickly. Fetching data stored in data structures such as Arrays, Maps, and Lists is possible because of search algorithms. Search operations determine the responsiveness of apps to the end-users.
```
Search algorithms can be written in other programming languages not only in Java

There is a long list of [search algorithms](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/searching-algorithms/), including the breadth-first algorithm, jump search, depth-first search algorithm, exponential search, and the Ubiquitous Binary Search. The binary search method is arguably the best search algorithm, while the linear search algorithm is considered the most basic one.

> Unlike the linear search algorithm that scans each element in an array starting from the first, the binary search method performs searching to half of the list. This is a significant benefit because it takes less time to search an element. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the linear search algorithm that scans each element in an array starting from the first, the binary search method performs searching to half of the list. This has a significant benefit because it takes less time to search  for an element. 
```

#### Artificial Neural Networks

> Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) designed in Java perform many tasks. They forecast trends, learn from data, and recognize patterns. With a highly interconnected network structure, ANNs are able to learn how to solve tasks by themselves. Their algorithms recognize correlations and hidden patterns in raw data. They cluster and classify this data and continuously learn and become better as time goes by.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) designed in Java perform many tasks. They forecast trends, learn from data, and recognize patterns. With a highly interconnected network structure, ANNs are able to learn how to solve tasks by themselves. Their algorithms recognize correlations and hidden patterns in raw data. They cluster and classify this data and continuously learn and become better as time goes on.
```

#### Multi-robot systems

> Robotics technology has significantly developed in recent years. Java is helping to program inexpensive robots that perform complex tasks. A collection of robots collaborating to achieve clearly defined goals is a multi-robot system (MRS). MRSs are applied in many real-life situations such as the military, disaster relief, smart home, and agriculture. They are preferred more than single-robot systems considering their higher efficiency, reliability, and scalability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Robotics technology has significantly developed in recent years. Java is helping to program inexpensive robots that perform complex tasks. A collection of robots collaborating to achieve clearly defined goals is referred to as a Multi-Robot System (MRS). MRSs are applied in many real-life situations such as the military, disaster relief, smart home, and agriculture. They are preferred more than single-robot systems considering their high efficiency, reliability, and scalability.
```

#### Machine learning solutions

> Java is an important part of a typical machine learning cycle. It helps in data engineering and processing. Machine learning models use the engineered and processed data for unsupervised and supervised functions. Java programing provides a systematic and efficient way for machine learning models to process large collections of data and datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java is an important part of a typical machine learning cycle as it helps in data engineering and processing. Machine learning models use the engineered and processed data for unsupervised and supervised functions. Java programing provides a systematic and efficient way for machine learning models to process large collections of data and datasets.
```

- Java has a wealth of [libraries](https://www.baeldung.com/java-ai) useful for developing many AI use cases. These Java AI libraries available for expert systems are specific to machine learning, neural networks, natural language processing, and rule-based systems.
- Java's write once, run everywhere concept ([WORA](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/why-is-java-write-once-and-run-anywhere/#)) allow programmers to develop their code on one system and run the same code (without recompilation) on other java-enables systems.
- The large community of Java developers is actively involved in creating AI and ML algorithms and coding a wide range of AI-enabled applications. The [Java official website](https://www.java.com/) supports the efforts to create ML and AI projects by providing features like scalability and object-orientedness. As a multi-paradigm language, Java supports both object-oriented and procedural programming philosophies.
- Java has the potential to code many types of algorithms. Besides, Java tools create appealing user interfaces and graphics.

### Java compared to other artificial intelligence programming languages

> Many artificial intelligence programming languages exist. R and Python are popular alternatives to Java, especially in sentimental analysis. Machine learning scientists believe that Python is a strong choice for text analysis and R for text mining. Python provides [CLIPS](https://clipspy.readthedocs.io/) and [NLTK](https://www.nltk.org/) libraries for sentiment analysis. NLTK allows you to stem and parse sentences for low-level analysis based on word frequencies. Java has [Stanford's CoreNLP](https://stanfordnlp.github.io/CoreNLP/) for sentiment analysis. This resource provides simple tools such as stemming and lexicalization of words to complex features like dependency analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many artificial intelligence programming languages exist. R and Python are popular alternatives to Java, especially in sentiment analysis. Machine learning scientists believe that Python is a strong choice for text analysis and R for text mining. Python provides [CLIPS](https://clipspy.readthedocs.io/) and [NLTK](https://www.nltk.org/) libraries for sentiment analysis. NLTK allows you to stem and parse sentences for low-level analysis based on word frequencies. Java has [Stanford's CoreNLP](https://stanfordnlp.github.io/CoreNLP/) for sentiment analysis. This resource provides simple tools such as stemming and lexicalization of words to complex features like dependency analysis.
```

> Java is a prioritized programming tool for those working on fraud detection, cyber-attacks, and network security. Other AI languages such as Python are less used in such areas. Fraud detection and network security algorithms are consumed mostly in large enterprises such as financial institutions. Most internal development teams in large organizations use Java. Developers in less enterprise-focused areas such as NLP use Python for its ease of use in building highly performing algorithms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java is a prioritized programming tool for those working on fraud detection, cyber-attacks, and network security. Other AI languages such as Python are less used in such areas. Fraud detection and network security algorithms are consumed mostly in large enterprises such as financial institutions. Most internal development teams in large organizations use Java. Developers in less enterprise-focused areas such as NLP use Python for its ease of use in building high performing algorithms.
```

R is favored in bioinformatics and bioengineering, where Java is not favored. Whether inside or outside academia, R has a long-standing history of its use in biomedical statistics. In these fields, Java is used to make software rather than program bioinformatics and bioengineering solutions.

### What is the best programming language for machine learning projects?
There is no single language that can be described as the best for machine learning and artificial intelligence. Choose the language that best meets your AI project needs. Python, for example, is liked for its ease of use and wealth of AI libraries. Enterprise environments prefer to use Java for their AI solutions' needs. Irrespective of the language you chose, you will enjoy creating data-driven solutions in these exciting times of machine learning.

### Conclusion
Artificial intelligence projects developed in Java have many benefits. Java is simple to debug, has a hugely supportive community of developers, is rich in AI libraries, API, and a framework, all of which make it a success to code Java algorithms for use in AI solutions.

> ### Further reading
> [Introduction To Cloud Computing](/engineering-education/introduction-to-cloud-computing/)
> [Java vs C#](/engineering-education/java-vs-csharp/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Further reading
- [Introduction To Cloud Computing](/engineering-education/introduction-to-cloud-computing/)
- [Java vs C#](/engineering-education/java-vs-csharp/)
```
